Why I don't wear hiking boots
=============================

Chris Klingebiel\
1/11/2016
-----------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are lots of ideas we accept as common sense: look both ways before
crossing the street. Carry an umbrella on rainy days. Wear heavy boots
when you go hiking.

The trick is to know when it's OK to ignore the conventional wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I did a fair amount of hiking growing up. Weekend outings with the Boy
Scouts, and my whole extended family would set off on mountain trails
over summer vacation. Everybody wore boots.

So years ago as a college student getting ready to go on my first
backpacking trip I thought I knew what I was doing. My fellow gear head
buddies and I went out and blew our savings to get all the "right"
equipment: North Face tent, Lowe Alpine pack, Therm-a-Rest, Gore-Tex
parka.

And a shiny new pair of Vasque boots.

You know: the traditional tried-and-true hiking boot built like a tank
with bullet-proof solid leather upper and an industrial Vibram sole.

I wore the new boots on day hikes for several months to break them in,
and after the blisters healed I figured I was ready for The Big Trip.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Considering how inexperienced we were the trip was actually quite a
success. Of course we made lots of mistakes and had setbacks. But in the
end we achieved our goals, had a lot of fun and survived two weeks in
the backcountry.

Among the things that didn't work out so well were my hiking boots. They
were heavy, and not very comfortable. And then I got blisters.
Apparently several months of occasional day hikes wasn't enough to break
them in. By the end of the 2nd day I couldn't walk in them.

Luckily I had also brought a pair of "camp shoes". These were old,
lightweight running shoes that were starting to fall apart and ready to
be thrown away. The idea was to wear them in the evenings when we were
done hiking for the day.

My boots weren't an option because of the blisters, so I reluctantly set
off on the 3rd day of hiking in my camp shoes.

This was remote backcountry in the high Sierra: rough, tangled mountain
terrain with no trails. We had to cross icy rivers, trudge through miles
of wet snow and traverse hours of sharp, slippery talus.

I assumed it was somehow terribly inappropriate to be doing all this in
light-duty shoes. I started off hoping to put my boots back on as soon
as the blisters healed.

But after a couple days I realized things were working out really well.
My feet got a little cold and wet in the snow, and my ankles got a few
scrapes in the talus. But the old running shoes were light and
comfortable, more nimble over awkward terrain and I was able to go
everywhere my buddies went in their hiking boots.

I ended up hiking the rest of the two week trip in my worn out running
shoes. I even kept wearing them after the blisters healed, lugging my
5-pound pair of new hiking boots strapped to my pack. (Kind of a big
deal when when the pack already weighed 55 pounds).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There's a saying that [a pound on your feet equals five pounds on your
back](http://www.fjaderlatt.se/2009/11/weight-on-your-feet.html)

If you think about it this makes sense. Say you're walking along on
level ground averaging 3 miles per hour. Each foot spends roughly half
the time on the ground while the other foot swings forward. Since each
foot is only moving half the time, it has to average 6 mph to keep up
with you. Accelerating from 0 to 6 mph and then back to 0 with every
step takes energy. The heavier your footwear, the more energy drained.

It gets worse if you're going uphill. You lift your shoes thousands of
times per mile. And extra weight on your feet makes it harder to descend
gingerly when you're trying to spare your knees on the way back down.

It seems clear that light running shoes are more efficient for hiking
than heavy boots. You can go farther and faster with less energy - great
whether you're trying to reach a distant destination or maximize workout
performance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Running shoes also tend to be softer and more comfortable than boots,
making hiking more enjoyable with reduced risk of blisters. This is
especially true if the shoes are already broken in. I'm a runner so I
have a steady supply of worn out lightweight shoes for hiking.

Of course there are some trade-offs. Low-cut uppers leave your ankles
exposed to bumps and scrapes as I discovered in the talus. In the
desert, cactus needles can poke through the tops of lightweight shoes
(been there). Some plants have long, sharp thorns that when stepped on
can punch through a thin sole into the bottom of your foot (done that).

The biggest issue may be ankle support. Lots of people feel they need to
wear hiking boots to protect their ankles. But I've hiked in running
shoes for years without injury in all kinds of environments, both on and
off trail. There are a lot of trail runners out there these days and I
doubt many of them wear heavy boots.

There doesn't seem to be a scientific consensus on whether boots prevent
ankle injury. Some sources claim tall uppers don't prevent sprains but
can [limit their
severity](http://articles.baltimoresun.com/1991-04-02/features/1991092202_1_ankle-sprains-reebok-ankle-and-foot).
Others dispute whether boots provide any benefit at all, pointing out
that thin soles keep your feet closer to the ground and provide better
tactile feedback to help [avoid rolling your
ankle](http://sectionhiker.com/myth-or-fact-do-hiking-boots-prevent-sprained-ankles/).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here's how I see things stacking up overall.

Advantages of running shoes:

-   lighter: more efficient, go farther and faster with less work
-   softer: more comfortable, less risk of blisters
-   thin sole: better tactile feedback, feet close to ground, less
    likely to roll ankles
-   more agile: better scrambling, less likely to trip, better ability
    to recover

Advantages of hiking boots:

-   thick sole: protects feet from rough ground, sharp objects
-   tall upper: protects ankles from bruises, scrapes, cuts, thorns,
    ticks, poison oak
-   stiff upper: \*may\* prevent or limit severity of twisted ankles (if
    you buy this)

Only you can decide what's right for you. If you find the benefits of
hiking boots compelling, go for it.

For me the choice is clear. I've done all my hiking in lightweight
running shoes ever since that first backpacking trip.
